---
layout: post
title: A Case Study in Readability
---

h1. {{ page.title | upcase }}

p(meta). 30 January, 2012 -- Menlo Park, CA

My VPS disappointed my blog and me. It failed, my trust withered. But I twisted this misfortune and took the opportunity to redesign my blog. I migrated it to "Github":http://pages.github.com/, and its design began to evolve. Here's a recounting of that evolution.

A few considerations stood out, as my thoughts turned over design decisions. For me, a few things happen on an ideal blog:

# The type-face reads enjoyably.
# The column width minimizes lateral movement of the eyes.
# Whitespace has meaning.
# Content scales well at different screen sizes and zoom levels.
# Lists, block-quotes, and code are distinct, but fit the flow of the page.
# Headings and links are apparent, but not obtrusive.
# The whole is aesthetically pleasing.

Readability concerned me primarily. Aesthetics were secondary (stuffed tersely into #7). With this list in mind, my work began.

h2. Type-face

Serif typefaces read more easily to my eyes (perhaps to others, too [[1]]), so this narrowed the scope of my choice. "Google web fonts":http://www.google.com/webfonts#ChoosePlace:select provides a wonderful way to explore free typefaces, and I decided upon Old Standard TT. A sample:

* I wrote this in Old Standard TT.
* *I wrote this in Old Standard TT.*
* _I wrote this in Old Standard TT._

Other great options exist. Lora and Amethysta contended for the position, but lost. Also, my thanks to "Beautiful Web Type":http://hellohappy.org/beautiful-web-type/ for inspiration.

h2. Column-width

My blog forks that of "Tom Werner":http://tom.preston-werner.com/, and so he deserves credit for its width, which is 35em on a 14px font-size. A relatively narrow column makes scanning text easy. I read faster on a Kindle, since it has a smaller column-width than most print novels. Why shouldn't my blog offer the same performance?

h2. Whitespace

Here, line-height and paragraph spacing concerned me most. I tweaked these parameters until things looked good: a line-height of 1.6em, and a paragraph margin of 1.2em. 

Paragraphs stand out from one another, but not too much.

h2. Content Scaling

A centered column fits well on most screen sizes, and since its width is em-based, it scales with the zoom-level. Hit _cmd+_ or _cmd--_ a few times, and you should find the effect generally pleasing.

h2. Lists, Block-quotes, and Code

Bullets bother me, so normal lists are set off slightly from the adjacent paragraphs through use of whitespace. I space list elements closer to one another than the margin with adjoining paragraphs. For instance:

* A loyal list item tells no lies.
* This list item betrayed me.

And now we're back to a paragraph. The list is distinctly set off, yet it remains unobtrusive. Numbered lists share one additional consideration: the position of the numbers (you can't elide numbers in a numbered list). They go outside the column to improve flow.

# This number is lower, and can do nothing about it.
# Higher numbers by birth should avoid egoism.

I set block-quotes by a slight margin and a subtle left border.

bq. I AM A SICK MAN.... I am a spiteful man. I am an unattractive man. I believe my liver is diseased. However, I know nothing at all about my disease, and do not know for certain what ails me. I don't consult a doctor for it, and never have, though I have a respect for medicine and doctors. Besides, I am extremely superstitious, sufficiently so to respect medicine, anyway (I am well-educated enough not to be superstitious, but I am superstitious). No, I refuse to consult a doctor from spite. That you probably will not understand. Well, I understand it, though. Of course, I can't explain who it is precisely that I am mortifying in this case by my spite: I am perfectly well aware that I cannot "pay out" the doctors by not consulting them; I know better than anyone that by all this I am only injuring myself and no one else. But still, if I don't consult a doctor it is from spite. My liver is bad, well -- let it get worse!

That's from one of Dostoevsky's "lesser known works":http://etext.virginia.edu/etcbin/toccer-new2?id=DosNote.sgm&images=images/modeng&data=/texts/english/modeng/parsed&tag=public&part=1&division=div2. [[2]] Moving on, a light shade of blue highlights the code-snippets. Not so much that it gets in the way:

pre. --Replace free variables in a statement as specified in provided mapping
replace_terms :: Stmt String -> [(Stmt String, Stmt String)] -> Stmt String
replace_terms rule lst =
  case rule of
    Var r1 -> Var r1
    Free r1 -> let search = List.find (\((e,f)) -> r1 == val f) lst in
      case search of
        Just (e,f) -> e
        Nothing -> Free r1
    (Op ro r1 r2) ->
      (Op ro (replace_terms r1 lst) (replace_terms r2 lst))
      
I'll consider adding syntax highlighting, but for now it's set off nicely enough.

h2. Headings and links

Size and *boldness* offset the headings. Links are colored "red":/. ALL-CAPS headings serve as a second level of differentiation. I didn't want the headings to be significantly larger than the content text, but that's by not a universal principal.

I took inspiration here from the style of academic papers.

h2. The Whole

Aesthetics are subjective, so this section I'll leave to you. Yet whether or not the effect of my design succeeded, we should give more thought to typography on the web. As Edward Tufte said:

bq. Good design is a lot like clear thinking made visual.

As I aspire to clear thinking, so will I aspire to good design.

fn1. Wikepedia on the serif "readability"::http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Serif#Readability_and_legibility debate.

fn2. +_Notes from the Underground_+, also known as +_The Underground Man_+.




