---
layout: post
title: Startup Paleo on $10 a Day
post_date: 1 February, 2012 -- Menlo Park, CA
---

h1. {{ page.title | upcase }}

p(meta). {{ page.post_date || upcase }}

With some reservations, I follow a Paleo lifestyle. [[1]] I make diet and health a priority, and from what I've seen in the Valley, so do many other startup founders. Valley entrepreneurs are fit. [[2]] Maybe it's our narcissism, but I doubt it. Founders tend to optimize, and why should the body be excluded?

But until they become rich, many founders are poor. So how can they be Paleo? Isn't it expensive? Not necessarily. Most people associate three types of food with paleolithic nutrition: meat, fruit and vegetables. That's costly stuff, but it's not the only option. [[3]] It turns out that a more price-sensitive founder should consider eggs and potatoes.

In the spirit of optimization, I ran a back of the envelope calculation. I wondered just how low I could get my food costs, if I tried in ernest. [[4]] But I gave myself two constraints. I needed the meals to provide at least 2,700 calories a day, and they also had to achieve the recommended daily values for all nutrients. 

Were I to live as a monk, I can support myself at under than $10 a day. That's as much as some people spend for one meal, eating out. And this plan maximizes all the nutrients on "Nutritiondata":http://nutritiondata.self.com/. [[5]]

The budget menu does break down monotonously: 9 eggs and 4 lbs of sweet potatoes [[6]] constitute the daily staples. These foods are cheap and extraordinarily nutrient-rich. Meat and vegetables only come as occasional luxuries. Given a choice, I would never eat this way. But I could, and that's the important thing. 

A healthy diet doesn't need to be expensive.

fn1. The Paleo label is useful, but misleading. While abstract evolutionary theory leads to Paleo conclusions, I follow the subset of Paleo supported by empirical science (this is a surprisingly large subset). See Kurt Harris and Matt LaLonde for more on this.

fn2. YC founders are over-represented in this observation, and the hackers I've met at YC don't at all fit the typical neck-beard stereotypes. 

fn3. There's a bit of an argument about what constitutes proper Paleo. A good rule of thumb is to ignore anything not supported by biological models or empirical evidence.

fn4. While I'm price-conscious, I've no compunction against spending money on good food.

fn5. Nutritiondata is a useful site for tracking vitamin intake.

fn6. Price breakdown: 9 eggs cost $1.50 (you can by 18 for $3), and 4 lbs of sweet potatoes cost $6 (at $1.50/lb). That leaves enough left over to buy butter (for cooking the potatoes, extra calories), and to have meat and vegetables a few times a week.
